# GraphQL Scalars implementation guide

[Scalar types](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-Scalars) are primitive types
in the GraphQL type system, usable for input and output.

## Serialization and Deserialization

A GraphQL request often requires a deserialization step before being executed
and a serialization of the execution result. By far the most frequently used
example is a GraphQL request sent over HTTP POST via JSON. The request body is a
JSON document that needs to be deserialized, containing the GraphQL document and
optionally an operation name and variables.

The execution result then is serialized to JSON for the HTTP response. As JSON
serialization is the most common GraphQL serialization format, the spec defines
how a GraphQL result should be
[serialized to JSON](https://spec.graphql.org/draft/#sec-JSON-Serialization).

For the discussion of Scalars, the deserialization of the variables is
significant. Deserialized variable values are one of the possible inputs a
Scalar implementation needs to handle.

## Observability

A Scalar implementation can be observed in three different ways:

1. the serialized result of an execution in JSON
2. the variables JSON input
3. the GraphQL literal input

We must choose a serialization format in order to observe a Scalar
implementation, as inside the GraphQL type system a Scalar is a primitive and
how a Scalar is represented in an execution result before serialization is
entirely up to the specific engine.

We are choosing to only consider JSON. Although JSON is only one possible
serialization format, it is by far the most important and the only format
defined by the GraphQL spec.

## Coercion

The process of ensuring that a value is valid and optionally converting it into
a more appropriate representation is called "coercion". For Scalars, there are
two different coercion mechanisms: "Result Coercion" and "Input Coercion". Both
are implemented as a set of functions taking an input and producing an output.
Result coercion consists of one function and input coercion of up to three
different ones.

Note: The input of a function is not to be confused with "Input Coercion". The
phrase "Input Coercion" refers to the overall mechanism, but the word "input"
describes what is consumed by a function.

## Result Coercion values and function

Result coercion is implemented as a single function per Scalar type called
`coerceResult`. The input is a "raw result value" and the output a "coerced
result value". The raw result value is the output of a previously invoked
resolver function, which is then coerced by invoking `coerceResult`.

The coerced result value is a leaf value of the overall execution result, which
is serialized to JSON. The serialized JSON value can be observed and a GraphQL
Scalar spec must clearly define the possible JSON values that a Scalar type can
produce.

## Input Coercion values

Input coercion deals with three different kind of values: literal, raw input
value and coerced input value.

### Literal

A literal is an element of the GraphQL language representing a fixed value. For
example, `"foo"` is a `StringValue` literal and `123` is an `IntValue` literal.

Literals are used for:

1. argument values for fields or directives

2. argument default values for fields or directives

3. variable default values of a GraphQL operation

### Raw Input Value

A raw input value is one of the following:

1. variable value for a GraphQL request

2. programmatically provided default argument value for a field or directive

3. programmatically provided default value for an input object field

4. programmatically provided value for a directive argument in schema definition
   language (SDL)

Not every GraphQL implementation may offer a programmatic way to provide these
input values, but every implementation needs to allow for raw input values
offered as variable values for a request.

The details of a raw input value is implementation specific. In JavaScript, it
might a Map, in Java it might be an object. The only way to observe a raw input
value is through the JSON value before deserialization.

### Coerced Input Value

A coerced input value is a value that is ready for consumption by a resolver. It
is coerced either from a literal or raw input value.

## Input coercion functions

Input coercion is implemented as a set of three functions `parseLiteral`,
`parseRawInputValue` and `rawInputValueToLiteral`.

The diagram illustrates the relationships between input coercion values.

![Input Coercion](input-coercion.png)

### Parse Literal

`parseLiteral` takes a GraphQL language literal as input and produces a coerced
input value as output.

### Parse Raw Input Value

`parseRawInputValue` takes a "raw input value" as input and produces a "coerced
input value".

### Raw Input Value to Literal

`rawInputValueToLiteral` takes a raw input value as input and produces a GraphQL
language literal.

It is used when a literal representation of a raw input value is required. For
example the default value for a field in an Introspection response. If a GraphQL
implementation doesn't provide a way to define a raw input value
programmatically, `rawInputValueToLiteral` might not be needed.

### Implementation rules

These three functions need to be compatible to each other, specifically:

**Rule 1:** every valid input for `parseRawInputValue` must be a valid input for
`rawInputValueToLiteral` and vice versa. This rule ensures that every raw input
value can be represented as literal.

**Rule 2:** for every valid input for `parseLiteral` there must at least one
corresponding input for `parseRawInputValue` resulting in the same coerced input
value. This rule ensures that all literals can be represented as raw input
value.

**Rule 3:** every output for `rawInputValueToLiteral` must be a valid input for
`parseLiteral`.

These rules ensure that for every valid literal we have at least one valid raw
value and vice versa.

## Coercion guidelines

While the specifics of the all coercion methods are implementation specific, as
a general rule they should only coerce a value when no information is lost and
raise an error otherwise.

Additionally, the input coercion should be liberal in what it accepts, while the
result coercion should be much more restricted and never produce different JSON
values for logically identical values. For example a `MyLocalDate` scalar could
accept the literals `"01-10-2022"` and `"01102022"` as input for the first of
October 2022, but the result coercion should always return one of the possible
representations.
